@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** C. Word Lists, by feature and function.                         **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newappendix{C1, Grouped Word Lists, by feature and function.} The following is the complete list of ALL reserved words@idx{Reserved Words},  in the @value{BUILD} build of GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION}.  Even though the functionality behind some of these words may not be implemented in this version of GnuCOBOL, none may be used as any user-defined name. This list includes ALL reserved, intrinsics, mnemonics and system and shows some 1100+ words in total. In addition there are the arithmetic and relational symbols see 1.3.15 as well as extra words that can be added and existing words removed by the use of the --std file content see the specific one used for each sub-set.

The following list of reserved words was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-reserved} and shows the reserved words, an implementation

@strong{Please notice:} This list is highly specific to the option
@option{-std=@var{dialect}} and reserved word options
(@option{-freserved=@var{word}}, @option{-fno-reserved=@var{word}}) in effect.
You can get the list for a given @var{dialect} by calling
@code{cobc -std=@var{dialect} --list-reserved}.

@include cbrese.tex

@newappendix{C2, Intrinsic Functions}
The following list of intrinsic functions was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-intrinsics} and shows the names of the available
functions, an implementation note and the number of parameters.

@include cbintr.tex

@newappendix{C3, System routines}
The following list of system routines was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-system} and shows the names of the available
system routines along with the number of parameters.

@include cbsyst.tex

@newappendix{C4, System names}
The following list of system names was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-mnemonics} and shows the system names categorized
by their type.

@include cbmnem.tex

@iftex
@sp 3
@center ------------------------------------------------------------
@center End of Appendix C --- Grouped Reserved Word List
@end iftex
