@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** E. Summary of Document Changes                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newappendix{E,Summary of Document Changes}
GnuCOBOL is an ever-evolving tool.  While all reasonable attempts will be made to maintain the currency of the information in this document, neither the author of this document nor the authors of the GnuCOBOL software extend any warranties of any kind for this document or for the information contained therein.

1st Edition - 23 JAN 2010
@enumerate
@item
INITIAL RELEASE OF DOCUMENT -- corresponds to OpenCOBOL 1.1, 06FEB2009 version.
@end enumerate

1st Edition (Rev 1) - 1 APR 2010
@enumerate
@item
Elaborated on the use of the GLOBAL clause in data item definitions.
@end enumerate

1st Edition (Rev 2) - 17 SEP 2010
@enumerate
@item
Corrected "section 0" broken hyperlinks in the document.

@item
Introduced documentation for the hitherto undocumented "COBCPY" environment variable.
@end enumerate

2nd Edition - 17 JUL 2012.
@enumerate
@item
Updated for version 23NOV2013 of GnuCOBOL 2.0.

@item
Corrected a problem with several bogus footnote references.

@item
Added an International A4 page layout format version of the document, in addition to the US Letter page format version.

@item
The use of a slash character ("/") in column 7 was documented - this feature has existed since at least the 06FEB2009 version of OpenCOBOL 1.1, but was undocumented.

@item
Added documentation on the DEBUG-ITEM special register.

@item
Updated DECLARATIVES documentation to better explain how to use it.

@item
A new section was added to the documentation to discuss the ramifications, rules and capabilities of sub-programming.

@item
Documentation was added on the COB_SET_DEBUG environment variable.

@item
The listings of all sample programs are now presented as listings generated by the GnuCOBOL Interactive Compiler utility (itself included as a sample program).  This not only shows full source listings of the sample programs but complete cross-reference listings as well.

@item
A new sample program -- DAY-FROM-DATE -- was introduced to illustrate how to write a user-defined function.

@item
A reference to a new figure documenting error codes was added to the EXCEPTION-STATUS function.

@item
Documentation was added to the CLOSE statement to explicitly document how the last record written to a LINE SEQUENTIAL or LINE ADVANCING file may have a terminating delimiter sequence written at the time the file is closed.

@item
Documentation was added to the WRITE statement to explicitly document how the ADVANCING options are handled with LINE SEQUENTIAL and the new LINE ADVANCING files.

@item
Additional documentation on the cobcrun command was added.

@item
User-defined functions are now supported.

@item
A new built-in subroutine -- C$PRINTABLE -- was introduced (the COBDUMP sample program now uses it.

@item
LINE ADVANCING files are now supported.

@item
Floating-point literals of the form [+-]nn.nnE[+-]nn are now supported.

@item
Z"xxxxx" null-delimited alphanumeric literals are now supported.

@item
The COPY statement now supports the COBOL2002 standard LEADING and TRAILING options as well as the "IN/OF library-name" and SUPPRESS PRINTING options.

@item
The REPLACE Compiler-Directing Facility (CDF) statement was introduced.

@item
Conditional code generation is now supported through the use of >>DEFINE, >>IF, >>SET, >>SOURCE and >>TURN Compiler-Directing Facility (CDF) directives.

@item
The COB_LINE_TRACE environment variable was renamed to COB_SET_TRACE.

@item
The COB_DISPLAY_WARNINGS environment variable was introduced.

@item
SOURCE-COMPUTER WITH DEBUGGING MODE is now supported.

@item
The CHARACTER CLASSIFICATION clause of the OBJECT-COMPUTER clause is now supported.

@item
Mnemonic names are now optional for SWITCH declarations in SPECIAL-NAMES; Eight new switches (SWITCH-0, SWITCH-9 through SWITCH-15) are now available; Switches may be specified as SW0 through SW15 as well as SWITCH-0 through SWITCH-15; a new print channel designation of CSP is now available; SYMBOLIC CHARACTERS are now supported.

@item
The device name DISC may now be used interchangeably with DISK in SELECT statements.

@item
Files may now be SELECTed with the "NOT OPTIONAL" designation in addition to "OPTIONAL".

@item
New USAGE's of BINARY-INT, BINARY-LONG-LONG and COMPUTATIONAL-6 were introduced.

@item
The LEFTLINE screen attribute was added to the SCREEN SECTION.

@item
New  intrinsic functions were introduced:
@itemize @bullet
@item
MODULE-CALLER-ID

@item
MODULE-DATE

@item
MODULE-FORMATTED-DATE

@item
MODULE-ID

@item
MODULE-PATH

@item
MODULE-SOURCE

@item
MODULE-TIME
@end itemize
@item A new option --- WITH KEPT LOCK --- was added to the READ verb.
@item
The following changes were made to the ACCEPT Statement:
@itemize @bullet
@item
The TIMEOUT option was added to Format 4.

@item
The non-functional CONVERSION option was added to Format 4.

@item
The LINE NUMBER option (a synonym for LINES) and COLS option (a synonym for COLUMNS) and ESCAPE KEY options were added to Format 6.

@item
A new format -- Format 7 -- was introduced.
@end itemize
@item The ALTER verb is now supported [Editorial Comment: this change was made only because NIST tests need it and not because you should be using it!]
@item
Options (mnemonic-name, STDCALL and STATIC) were added to the CALL verb.

@item
The non-functional CONVERSION option was added to Format 4 of the DISPLAY statement.

@item
The REVERSED option for the OPEN statement is now supported syntactically, even though it is non-functional.

@item
The READY TRACE and RESET TRACE statements were introduced.

@item
A new option -- STATUS -- was added to the STOP verb.

@item
The following built-in named subroutines were added:
@itemize @bullet
@item
C$CALLEDBY

@item
C$GETPID

@item
CBL_GET_CSR_POS

@item
CBL_GET_SCR_SIZE
@end itemize
@item The following built-in numbered subroutines were added:
@itemize @bullet
@item
X"E4"

@item
X"E5"
@end itemize
@end enumerate

3rd Edition - 09 APR 2014.
@enumerate
@item
The document has been converted to GNU Texinfo format, from which both GNU "info" and PDF files may be created for distribution.

@item
A new document --- "Sample Programs" --- has been created from the former "Sample Programs" chapter of this document.

@item
A new document --- "Quick Reference" --- has been introduced to provide a complete summary of all syntax diagrams.
@end enumerate

3rd Edition - 01 MAY 2014.
@enumerate
@item
Updated to include RWCS documentation, added with GnuCOBOL 2.1.

@item
Removed the "See Also" links from all sections; with the Index now being fully hyperlinked, the maintenance of these links as well as the document size increase imposed by them is no longer justified.
@end enumerate

4th Edition - Late 2014, Not issued for public use.

5th Edition - Changes July 2017 through Sept 2017 for v2.2 Final.
@enumerate
@item
All documents have been updated to use GnuCOBOL instead of GNU COBOL including this update list.

@item
All documents dated to June 2017 for use with the general release of v2.2.

@item
References as to the availability of reportwriter inserted.

@item
Amended count of reserved word from 700 to >900.

@item
Changed record locking status from 47 to 51. Bug #272.

@item
Added in 4.1.4.3 extra switch settings 16-26, A through Z. Bug #302.

@item
Updated Appendix B Reserved Work list. from cobc --(lists- intrinsics, mnemonics, system, reserved).

@item
All sections passed through spell checker.

@item
Updated cobcrun & cobc --help output. Mods to section 1 & copyright info.

@item
22/07 Added details for ACCEPT OMITTED as 6.17.1.8 including links.

@item
24/04 Reformat order of changes so latest is last in this list instead of push down.

@item
24/07 Added missing ID elements - ID, program-id options.

@item
25/07 Added missing elements for Screen section data, OMITTED in ACCEPT console & screen, EXCEPTION-STATUS.

@item
25/07 Catch up on bug closures - Bugs Now cleared and closed are - 272, 302, 396-398, 401.

@item
27/07 More info added for PROTECT SIZE taken from MF docs.

@item
18/08 Fix comments for bug #97.

@item
07/09 Issued docs for GnuCOBOL Compiler v2.2 Final.
@end enumerate

5th Edition, Update 1 - Sept 2017.
@enumerate
@item
09/09 Fix and cleared, Bug #422.

@item
09/09 Change around SPECIAL-NAMES and REPOSITORY as wrong order, Bug #424.

@item
10/09 Added system library elements CBL_GC_ FORK, GETOPT*, HOSTED*, NANOSLEEP*, PRINTABLE (Replaces legacy C$PRINTABLE) AND WAITPID (Replaces legacy C$WAITPID). Note legacy names still supported at least for now but may well be removed so suggest replace names likewise replace CBL_OC_xxx* with CBL_GC_xxx).

@item
11/09 Added new note in chap. 1 - Introduction regarding non avail of RWCS and ref to 1.3.13.

@item
      Renamed usage of CBL_OC to CBL_GC for CBL_GC library routines within CBL_GC sections.

@item
      Added new entries as 8.1.3 and moved up following 8.1 entries. Likewise for main menu.

@item
      Added new for 8.2.3 showing runtime.cfg and updated with current default.conf at same.

@item
      Adjust 4.1.3 & 4.1.4 as not set up in index of 1 & 4 in right order.

@item
      Checked and changed menus for incorrect or missing numbering.

@item
14/10 Bug #447 fixed (CDF Replacing trailing == missing.

@item
20/10 Bug #450 Removed example one and refs to COMP-5, added note for the three usage types trunc applies to and amended the performance test example with extra resulting figures.

@item
01/11 Added Appendix E for changes since 2009 thanks to Edward Hart (see his grammar document).

@item
07/11 Provided more needed info for -P compiler option.

@item
25/11 Updated heads for 2.3 / Dec2017 & CP to 2018.

@item
28/11 In 1.1 added reference to the GnuCOBOL FAQ.

@item
10/12 Updated heads for 3.0 rc1 24DEC2017, changed remarks for RW in

@item
      chapters 1.3.13 and 7. showing availability for v3.0.

@item
      -> 6th Ed. to be issued in Jan 18 for v3.0 final.
@end enumerate

6th Edition on release of v3.0 rc.
@enumerate
@item
2017.

@item
17/12  Update description for NUMVAL-C along with missing 2nd & 3rd arguments and more detail.

@item
Added missing third parameter execution-time to functions DATE-TO-YYYYMMDD, DAY-TO-YYYYDDD, YEAR-TO-YYYY.

@item
Added missing functions: FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE, FORMATTED-DATE, FORMATTED-DATETIME, FORMATTED-TIME, INTEGER-OF-FORMATTED-DATE, TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME and renumbered all functions accordingly by position in Guide.

@item
18/12  More notes for NUMVAL, NUMVAL-C.

@item
NUMVAL-C contains two references for testing descriptions.

@item
Removed the 'syntax ref for FINAL CONTROL FOOTINGS at 7.2.

@item
Removed incorrect information about a fatal error when opening or other processing of a file as all errors can be recovered with a Cobol program using file status test or using a Declarative section.

@item
19/12  Moved current updates section in D and top of manual into a included text file.

@item
20/12  Added comment regard REPORT section clauses and their order.

@item
21/12  Run Spellcheck against manual sources to catch typo's.

@item
Added warning about using WS area only for data referenced within RW.

@item
Removed warning in RW notes about CODE IS and COLUMNS are ignored - not any more.

@item
23/12  Moved chap. 7 - 10 to 9 - 12, 3 - 6 to 4 - 7. Created new ch.2 from 1.3 & new ch.8 from 7.16 to ch. 8. Moved 8.21 to special registers?. Removed report about specific non-implemented functions in 8.1 that now are.  Inserted page breaks in 8.2. Moved Ch. 7.6 - 7.13 to at end of Ch. 2. NEEDS resorting.

@item
24/12  Added support for SPLIT and SPARSE keys in ISAM (Indexed) type files see references for RECORD and ALTERNATE KEY clauses. Update ChangeLog.

@item
Create index for 'Split Keys' reference.

@item
25/12  Remove comment from RW chapter about availability as now included.

@item
27/12  Added missing SET LAST EXCEPTION to PG and QR.

@item
Added un-implemented functions: BOOLEAN-OF-INTEGER, CHAR-NATIONAL, DISPLAY-OF, EXCEPTION-FILE-N, EXCEPTION-LOCATION-N, INTEGER-OF-BOOLEAN, NATIONAL-OF, STANDARD-COMPARE with warning not implemented.

@item
Added missing system functions CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR & CBL_SET_CSR_POS. Spotted in NEWS file.

@item
29/12  Adjusted format for select idx to reduce width of text.

@item
2018.

@item
01/01  Update all 3 for 01 Jan 2018.

@item
05/01  Updated contents of runtime.cfg in Chp. 10.

@item
13/01  Updated comments for CBL_CHECK_FILE_EXIST as back to front/wrong.

@item
14/02  For SORT replaced diagram reference of file-name-3 to file-name-2 as wrong.

@item
19/02  Updated references for RWCS in Chap. 1 to point correctly to 2.1.13. Included comment about the NEWS file for up to the minute changes to language features. Included auto version refs in ch. 1 & 2 but some may well still be missing.

@item
15/03  Updated references for CBL_READ_KBD_CHAR but with content from MF WB but better than nothing.

@item
26/03  Updated Perform varying in 7.8.29.3 to show that omitting sub-clause BY will be treated as if 'BY 1' was specified. Changed 11.8.3 text.

@item
27/03  Changed >>SET CONSTANT to remove refs to 'AS' changes to 11.8.3 removed dups.

@item
01/04  Fixes for #Bug 508, 505.

@item
09/04  Changed version/build to intermediate date and version as I give up guessing when.

@item
19/04  Changed details regard internal compiler variable COB_MAX_FIELD_PARAMS used in call.c from common.c in sections 7.8.5 and 11.6.1.1 also change reference of 11.5.1 in section 11.6 to be 11.6.1.

@item
08/05  Updated version and date for current compiler also changed references for 20XX standard to 2014 with other minor comments in section 1. Changed 2.1.13 to specify that RWCS is available as at v3.0 and removed link info at SF as redundant with release of v3.0.

@item
22/05  Changes to: 8.1.58 reload program output for v3.0 but not showing any difference, 8.2.28 Clean up description swapping '/' with 'and'.

@item
26/05  Added missing screen io status codes in 7.8.1.4.13. - Bug #524.

@item
30/05  Changed case of COBOL to Cobol in regard to the language in section 2 to ease reading and added comment re: compiler name by case. Added notes regarding reserved word count and list in 2.1.2 and Appendix B. Spelling error (missing 's') in 2.1.2. Bug #525.

@item
31/05  Changed case of ' Cobol ' to ' COBOL ' throught out document but most seems to be in chaps. 1 & 2.

@item
12/07  8.1.63 NUMVAL & 8.1.64 (& B), NUMVAL-C each has one #CR too many - Spotted by Eugenio. Bug #536. 7.8.43 Repos Ident.-3 down a line - yep also spotted by Eugenio, Bug #530 QR also fixed.

@item
16/07  8.1.64 & B missed one more CR. See 12/07.

@item
17/07  Removed references in sect. 1 regarding RWCS - no longer applies. #540.

@item
28/08  Typo in ch. 2 resr = rest.

@item
13/10  Typo at 7.8.30.1.

@item
12/11  Updated Changelog to Updates content and commit call changes as forgot to do so.

@item
06/12  Updated version and date, (c) to 2019 in case I forget next month.

@item
2019.

@item
08/01  In chapter 2.1 updated processes to add, remove reserved words and how the dialect used is defined by usage of cobc steering of -std and -conf.

@item
Stopped indicating a date of final release for v3.0 - given up.

@item
Minor update in 2.0 regarding different manuals available. Added extra text to 7.8.3 ALLOCATE.

@item
02/03  In 7.8.39.2 SET, the first para removed as option is available. Added extra info regarding CALL for PROGRAM-POINTER both as a element of the CALL and as RETURNING.

@item
Added comment in 1.0 for the FAQ as a must read document.
@end enumerate

@include updates.texi
@iftex
@sp 3
@center ------------------------------------------------------------
@center End of Appendix E --- Summary of Document Changes
@end iftex
