@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** E. Summary of Document Changes                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newappendix{E,Summary of Document Changes}
GnuCOBOL is an ever-evolving tool.  While all reasonable attempts will be made to maintain the currency of the information in this document, neither the author of this document nor the authors of the GnuCOBOL software extend any warranties of any kind for this document or for the information contained therein.

8th Edition on release of v3.2 with some updates for 4.0+.
@enumerate

@item
2021.

25/01  Updated version to v3.1.2 with date 25 Jan 21.

@item
29/01  Updated formats for OCCURS and now only using one file.
       Ditto for Quick Reference.

@item
  7/02 Added procedure statement EXHIBIT,  updated reserved words in Appendix C and removed same in Appendix B.

 @item
  4/03 Modified Exhibit points 1/2 to loose the blank lines.

 @item
 12/04  Updated text for CBL_SET_CSR_POS, repos EXHIBIT to 15B.

 @item
 13/05 Updated USAGE for BINARY=C-LONG.
       Updated version to v3.2 with date 13 May 2021.

 @item
 15/05 Updated EXHIBIT and renumbered paragraphs.

@item
 24/08 Added detail for ACCEPT DAY-OF-WEEK.
       Changed descriptive for Display screen-data-name removing screen and adding position specs
       see bug #743 now cleared.

@item
 30/08 Change Appendix F to separate sections F1 through F4 adding changes for v3.1.1 and v4.
       Added updates.texi after E.texi for latest document updates.

@item
  5/09 Added Intrinsic functions BIT-OF, BIT-TO-CHAR, HEX-OF, HEX-TO-CHAR as 8.1.105 thru 108.but needs resorting of # in 8.1.
  Updated definition for C$SLEEP.

@item
 12.09 Multi typo's in sections 2, 3.5, .14, 6.9.51, 8.1.64B (chgd 2 to V2, 12.2, spotted by Patrik - Thank you for the updates.

@item
 17/10 Extra information regarding LINE SEQUENTIAL file processing in 2.1.8 which refers to 10.2.3.4 and 10.2.3.7.

@item
 17/10 CDF PAGE directive changes to details. Likewise to the Quick Reference manual.

@item
 21/11 DIVIDE statement minor changes (#786).

@item
 23/11 DIVIDE changed as 7.8.13.1 INTO and 13.3 BY, must have been asleep.

@item
 25/11 Updated example listings in 10.1.1. updated to current default.conf in 10.1.5 as out of date.

@item
 23/12 Update to START verb to make KEY compulsory for ISAM.

@item
 24/12 Update to START added missing sub clauses [WITH SIZE] | [WITH LENGTH].

@item
 25/12 Update to sections 10.2.2 and 10.2.3 to clarify where program modules are loaded from i.e., directories pointed to by COB_LIBRARY-PATH and only if not found in PATH.
 Update to syntax diagran for START to clarify that SIZE and LENGTH keywords are mandatory words even if obvious.
 Updated description for COMBINED-DATETIME

@item
 31/12 Update to section 6.8.1 change program names to Usage-Lengths and replace the source listing to be correct positioned on cc8 as well as giving o/p for 64bit Linux. Bug #799.

@item
2022.

@item
 07/01 Remove references to PATH in 10.2.2 &.3 wrong.

@item
 16/01 In 2.2.5 near bottom example of compute 5 / 2.5 + 7 * 2 - 1.15 had wrong result, should be 14.85. Clean up descriptions for USAGE COMP[UTATIONAL] & COMP etc in 6.9.49 and 7.8.1.2 accept from command-line.

@item
 24/01 In 7.8.23 type fixed of elementary - remove '3' no vers change.

@item
 17/02 In DISPLAY type 4 added OMITTED in place of identifier-1 to stop any screen content to change.

@item
 07/03 IN 7.8.1.9, Accept EXCEPTION-STATUS these are two words i.e., EXCEPTION STATUS not one.

@item
 27/03 In 3.6 A comment included to advise that >>DEFINE should be used for new programs, over >>SET as it is not in the Cobol Standards. Included in 10.1 -Wno-terminator to stop warnings when not using END-XXX (Also see -Wterminator).

@item
 07/04 IN section 3 CDF commands I have changed starting point from CC8 to cc7 as highlighted by Chris Gabel.

@item
 21/04 In section 8.1 updated BYTE-LENGTH amd LENGTH-AN where referencing 16 bit characters to use N(4) instead of X(4).

@item
 23/04 In section 11.6.1.1, for Definitions of 'By Reference' and 'By Content' added missing 'by'. Spotted by Michael F Gleason, bug 828.

@item
 03/05 In 8.1.82 & 83 for SUBSTITUTE and SUBSTITUE-CASE text on usage of variables, the need to use function TRIM is needed to remove leading and trailing spaces must be considered with example code block.

@item
 15/05 In section 7.8.48 TRANSFORM added 'CHARACTERS' to the format it has no effect with or without.

@item
  1/06 In section 5.1.3 Show example of REPOSITORY has only the last entry with a period. In keeping with SPECIAL-NAMES etc that only the last entry has the period / full stop terminator. Use extra space in 6.9.49 to show that the TO value in the FROM / TO values is NOT negative as only the From value is usually is.

@item
 26/06 In 2.2.4 (+) should have been (-). Added Type (format 1) TYPEDEF, SAME AS in 6.9 and shifted down section numbers.

@item
 29/06 Minor corrections to text for TYPEDEF, SAME AS & missing page reference. USAGE text addition.

@item
  1/07 Adding XDF chapter 13. Early days - needs tidying up.

@item
  6/07 In 6.9.53 added WHEN SET TO FALSE sub-clause in SYN-DD-VALUE-1.
@item
  9/07 In 6.9.49 typo date should be data.
@item
 10/07 Added functions CONCAT, CONTENT-LENGTH and CONTENT-OF.
@item
 11/07 Adjusted and sorted functions at 8.1.
@item
 12/07 In 2.1.2 added details regardingsize of a user defined word i.e., from 31 chars to 63 using the right -std.
       In 7.8.17 EXIT statement RETURNING|GIVING missing from EXIT PROGRAM and description details.
@item
 13/07 For ENTRY added missing GO TO and other content.
@item
 16/07 For GO TO  ENTRY entry-name added.
@item
 27/08 Updated context for >>SOURCE in section 3.7 for FIXED, FREE, VARIABLE and others, likewise for >>SET. Updated copyright for FSF.
@item
 05/09 Added new clauses in 6.9 - Data Description Clauses for PG and QR.

@item
 11/09 Added PICTURE option 1 bit or boolean in 6.9.33 with a warning about compiler version implementation from v3.1-rc1. In 6.9.46 last sentence changed 'four' to 'eight'  for a double word binary number.

@item
 26/09 Added Standard 85 EXAMINE verb at 7.8.15B.

@item
 29/09 Added extra notes for CODE-SET referring to compiler version and the NEWS file.

@item
 06/12 At 8.2.44 for offset addition to "The first byte of a file is byte offset 0" is "and MUST be preset to zero for first use".

@item
2023.

@item
 02/01 At 7.8.1.5  Added ACCEPT from MICROSECOND-TIME (ACU. New commit [r4908] by sf-mensch.

@item
 03/01 At 7.8.1.5 Added more information regarding TIME and MICROSECONDS-TIME and update for FORMATTED-CURRENT-DATE in 8.1.29.

@item
 04/01 7.8.1.5 Diagram had missing TIME and text had 2 copies of it.

@item
 06/01 6.8.1 01-Level Constants,  added arithmetic-expression-1. Re-introduced Updates from ed. 8.

@item
 15/01 8.1.33 FRACTION-PART Included text to specify picture must include preceding 'V' and provide better example.

@item
 25/01 8.1.94 TEST-FORMATTED-DATETIME - Improved the text and provide an example of usage. Added extra info regarding Date/Time formats but may not apply to specific compiler version.

@item
 22/02 6.8.1 Changed order for literal-1 and arthmetic-expression & 4 added arthmetic-expression. In 7.8.9 Cleaned up COMPUTE (=|) to (= | ). Correct spelling of expression in various places in section 6.

@item
 20/05 6.9.53 VALUE for tables new sub extry, 8.1.6 & 6 examples provided.

@item
  9/06 10.1.4 Minor order change + text for copy order.

@item
 12/06 2:1.12.2 Added extra item for Extended colours thanks to Eugenio.

@item
 06/07 6.9.24 Additional notes regarding JUSTIFIED right.

@end enumerate
